hypothesis that tree plantations may foster the regeneration of native
woody species, was tested through studies of understory floristic composition, height-class distribution
of naturally regenerated seedlings and saplings of indigenous woody species, and soil
seed banks in the native and exotic tree plantations in Central Ethiopia. A total of 70 plots,
having 10 x 10 m area each, were studied in six monoculture plantation stands of four exotic
species, i.e. Cupressus lusitanica (2 stands of different age), Eucalyptus globulus, Pinus patula,
P. radiata and Juniperus procera, an indigenous coniferous species. Ages of the plantations
ranged between 14 and 42 years. Soil seed bank analysis was also undertaken from soil samples
collected in each of the 70 plots to examine the similarity between the soil seed flora and
aboveground vegetation. Vegetation diversity was assessed through analyses of floristic composition,
species richness and abundance. A total of 37 naturally regenerated indigenous woody
species were recorded beneath all plantation stands, with densities ranging between 1630 and
18270 individuals ha-1. There was considerable variation among plantation stands/species with
respect to the density of naturally regenerated native woody species. Generally, seedling populations
were the most abundant components of the regeneration in most of the plantation
stands, forming 85% of the total regeneration count. A total of 68 plant species represented by
53 herbs, eight woody species and seven grasses were recorded in the soil seed bank from all
stands. Similarity between the soil seed banks and aboveground flora (both seedlings and larger
plants) was very low implying that the role of soil seed banks in the regeneration is low and
dispersal of seeds from the adjacent natural forest plays an important role in the process.
These results support the concept that forest plantations can foster the regeneration of native
woody species and increase biodiversity in the plantation stands, if seed sources are available
in the vicinity of the plantations.