The rate of carbon accumulation by terrestrial plant communities in a processlevel,
mechanistic modeling is the difference of the rate of gross photosynthesis by a canopy
(Ag) and autotrophic respiration (R) of the stand. Observations for different biomes often show
that R to be a large and variable fraction of Ag, ca. 35% to 75%, although other studies suggest
the ratio of R and Ag to be less variable. Here, R has been calculated according to the two compartment
model as being the sum of maintenance and growth components. The maintenance
respiration of foliage and living fine roots for different biomes has been determined objectively
from observed nitrogen content of these organs. The sapwood maintenance respiration is based
on pipe theory, and checked against an independently derived equation considering sapwood
biomass and its maintenance coefficient. The growth respiration has been calculated from the
difference of Ag and maintenance respiration. The Ag is obtained as the product of biome-specific
radiation use efficiency for gross photosynthesis under unstressed conditions and intercepted
photosynthetically active radiation, and adjusted for stress. Calculations have been
done using satellite and ground observations for 36 consecutive months (1987-1989) over large
contiguous areas (ca. 105 km2) of boreal forests, cropland, temperate deciduous forest, temperate
grassland, tropical deciduous forest, tropical evergreen forest, tropical savanna, and tundra.
The ratio of annual respiration and gross photosynthesis, (R/Ag), is found to be 0.5-0.6 for
temperate and cold adopted biome areas, but somewhat higher for tropical biome areas (0.6-
0.7). Interannual variation of the fluxes is found to be generally less than 15%. Calculated
fluxes are compared with observations and several previous estimates. Results of sensitivity
analysis are presented for uncertainties in parameterization and input data. It is found that
uncertainty in determining maintenance respiration for tropical biomes is such that R/Ag for
these biomes could be similar to that for temperate biomes.