Vast areas of Afromontane forests in Ethiopia have been converted to cropland,
shrub land or grazing areas. Hence, knowledge and understanding of the factors affecting the
regeneration of tree species is of a paramount importance for the restoration of such areas. The
natural regeneration of Olea europaea subsp. cuspidata, a dominant late-successional species,
was studied in five sites in the Afromontane zone in Southern Wello (Ethiopia), for two years
(1994-1996). Annual seedling establishment showed marked variation between years and
among sites. Recruitment rates during the dry season (October-February) were significantly
lower than in the moderately wet (February-June) and wet (June-October) seasons. Sites also
showed significant differences related to microclimatic conditions. The survivorship of the
seedling cohorts established during the long dry, moderately wet and wet seasons differed
significantly, with higher survivorship during the wet season. Mortality was higher for small
and large seedlings than for juveniles, and decreased with age. The mean annual relative
growth rate for the three size classes showed a marked decrease from 1994-95 to 1995-96 with
the highest growth rates consistently found for small seedlings. In a field experiment, seed
germination was high after the rainy seasons for both intact and mechanically scarified seeds.
In both open and shade treatments the scarified seeds showed higher cumulative germination
percentage. For seeds sown in February, the seedlings under shade attained significantly
higher height than those in the open and also showed a significantly higher number of leaves.
Seeds were still germinating 35 months after sowing, indicating long persistence of the seeds.
Rainfall seasonality appears to be a dominant factor influencing the establishment,
recruitment rate, survival and growth of Olea europaea subsp. cuspidata populations,
particularly during the early life–cycle stages. The results also indicate the importance of
shade and protection from disturbance for successful seedling establishment and growth of
Olea europaea subsp. cuspidata.