Forest burning for pasture installation in tropical areas represents an important
component on biogeochemical cycles. In order to get information about modifications within the
element composition after forest burning, in this local study the attempt has been undertaken
to provide a first overview about the total contents of a larger set of elements (29) and their distribution
patterns in topsoils when forest is shifted for pasture use. The work was carried out
in 1999 in Rondônia state (Brazilian Amazon Basin) focussing on a native forest site and 4
neighbouring pastures established in 1987, 1983, 1972 and 1911 after forest conversion. Mostly
higher values of nearly all investigated macro- and micro-nutrients, but also of other elements
(e.g Sr, Cr, Ni, V or Pb) as well as increases of pH levels could be determined twelve years after
forest burning in the pasture of 1987. Conversely, pH values of pH 7.6 five years after forest
clearing in pasture 1987 (0-5 cm) and pH 5.5 in the same pasture after 12 years suggest a loss
of basic acting cations in the present sandy soils due to high rainfall intensities. After initial
element increases in pasture of 1987 the decreases of main nutritional elements (e.g. C, N, K,
S) in the pasture of 1983 as well as again the enhanced levels in pasture 1972 and 1911 suggest
both a persistent leaching and a function of pasture age where external element inputs exceed
outputs. Ash deposition, animal excreta, accumulation of organic matter as well as natural
soil conditions are discussed as influencing factors on the measured element budgets.
Chemical fingerprint graphs of the pasture soils related to the chemical conditions in the forest
soil illustrated different element distributions in the pastures. Nevertheless, in this particular
area it can be suggested that continuous pasturing after forest clearing primarily enriched the soils in elements. From the ecotoxicological aspect the results showed low risks of toxic elements
in the considered area compared to element ranges for unpolluted soils.