The aim of this study was to determine the level of salinity tolerance of
Spartina townsendii and to study the mechanisms by which this species survives salinity and
the specific conditions at the intertidal zone. Therefore, Spartina was irrigated with five different
saline levels ranging from nutrient solution (control) to 100% seawater (480 mM NaCl) in a
“quick check” system (QCS). The salinity tolerance was measured on the basis of the two parameters
maximum yield, and gas exchange. a) The maximum yield of Spartina was reduced
by 50% (C50-value) at 480 mM NaCl salinity. b) Gas exchange parameters such as net photosynthesis
(µmol * m-2 * s-1), stomatal conductance (mol * m-2 * s-1), transpiration (mol * m-2 * s-1),
and water use efficiency of the photosynthesis (µmol CO2 * mmol-1 H2O) were lowest at 500 mM
NaCl-salinity. The strategies employed by Townsend´s cordgrass for avoiding salt injury depend
on adaptation to low water potential and high Na and Cl concentrations. Spartina has
sufficient adjustment mechanisms even at high NaCl salinity suggesting that there was no
reason for growth reduction by water deficit. The low external water potential was balanced
e.g. by a decrease of the osmotic potential. Especially Na and Cl were accumulated in high concentrations
in the root and shoot. The main defence of Spartina townsendii to elevated salinity
regimes is the activation of salt glands. These salt glands are working highly selective and
eliminate relatively large quantities of salt by secretion to the leaf surface. However, the salt
glands were neither able to balance the high burden especially of Na in the leaf tissues at the
high salinity treatment, nor useful in maintaining a constant supply of essential elements such
as K, Mg and Ca. The gap between a sufficient nutrient supply and NaCl accumulation grows
with increasing salinity and seems to limit the salinity tolerance of Spartina by nutrient imbalance
and/or ion toxicity. The high salinity tolerance and the ecological engineering of
Spartina townsendii can produce various ecological (e.g. highly effective nutrient cycling of N,
Fe and S) and economical (e.g. biomass crop) benefits. The QCS offers a reliable basis to define
this species as a potentially useful cash crop halophyte.