Biodiversity is dynamic in nature; species and their populations are in a constant
state of evolutionary change. The changes, as well as human-induced modifications of
biodiversity, must be thought against the background of its 3.5 billion years history. The discrepancy
between field knowledge and predictions; the applicability of the model to continual
situations, where ecosystem fragmentation and consequent area loss is the important consideration
and various methods for predicting biodiversity distribution have been discussed here.
The utility of landscape ecological principles for biodiversity characterization has been described.
Use of satellite remote sensing, geographic information system (GIS) and global positioning
system (GPS) techniques for assessing the disturbed and biologically-rich sites by many
researchers have been highlighted. Satellite-derived vegetation map and various landscape
ecological parameters (viz., patch shape, patch size, number of patches, porosity, fragmentation,
interspersion and juxtaposition) were analyzed by various authors to characterize various
habitat ecosystems. The present approach of prioritizing the biodiversity rich sites has the advantage
of integrating spatial and non-spatial information with horizontal relationships and
thus provides clue for conservation prioritization. Under the behest of Department of Biotechnology
and Department of Space, Government of India, landscape ecological approach is being
used to characterize the biologically-rich areas in six regions of the country i.e., north-east India,
western Himalaya, western Ghats, Andaman and Nicobar islands, eastern and central India.
A case study for the state of Arunachal Pradesh has been discussed in detail. The potential
applications of the database prepared as a result of the inventory have been described. This
method of biodiversity characterization has the following advantages over the traditional
method of inventory e.g. (i) has an ecological basis since many ecological components are considered
(ii) all the components have precise positional (locational) representation on earth surface.
In the days of pilferage of bioresources and in the backdrop of intellectual property right
issues, a quick and effective geospatial technique for characterizing biodiversity at landscape
level will go a long way in conservation and judicious management of bioresources.