The soil seed bank was investigated in plantation stands and adjacent natural
forests at Menagesha-Suba and Munessa-Shashemene forest sites in central and southern
Ethiopia, respectively. The total numbers of species identified in the 0-9 cm soil layer were 58
at Menagesha-Suba and 52 at Munessa-Shashemene with the corresponding soil seed bank
densities ranging between 27,200 and 82,600, and 4,500 and 36,900 seeds m-2, respectively.
Herbs dominated both in the number of species and densities of seeds while the contribution of
woody species was generally low. The horizontal distribution of seeds in the soil exhibited considerable
variation at both sites. However, the overall vertical distribution of seeds in the soil
was similar in all stands with the highest densities occurring in the upper three centimeters of
soil with gradually decreasing densities with increasing depth. The similarities in species composition
of the soil seed bank was generally low in stands both within and between the two
sites. In general, the results provide further evidence that consolidate the conclusions of previous
studies on soil seed banks in Ethiopia. The dry Afromontane region, in which the two study
sites are located, can be characterized as possessing large numbers of buried seeds of forbs,
grasses and sedges. Only a few woody plants are represented, and these by few seeds, in the
soil seed bank, suggesting that most woody plants rather use the seed rain, seedling banks or
coppicing from stumps as alternative regeneration routes. These results imply that the herbaceous
flora has a better chance of natural recovery in the event of disturbances owing to the diverse
soil seed banks while the regeneration of woody species, particularly trees and shrubs,
would be prevented by removal of mature individuals and their seedlings on the forest floor
since most of them lack seed reserves in the soil. This, in turn, indicates that future existence
of the woody flora characteristic of dry Afromontane areas in Ethiopia depends on the conservation
and sustainable utilization of the few remnant natural forests.