This synthesis addresses local institutions and associated management practices
related to natural resources and ecosystem dynamics, with an emphasis on traditional
ecological knowledge systems. Traditional practices for ecosystem management include
multiple species management, resource rotation, ecological monitoring, succession
management, landscape patchiness management and practices of responding to and managing
pulses and ecological surprises. There exist practices that seem to reduce social-ecological
crises in the events of large-scale natural disturbance such as creating small-scale ecosystem
renewal cycles, spreading risks and nurturing sources of ecosystem reorganization and
renewal. Ecological knowledge and monitoring among local groups appears to be a key element
in the development of many of the practices. The practices are linked to social mechanisms
such as flexible user rights and land tenure; adaptations for the generation, accumulation and
transmission of ecological knowledge; dynamics of institutions; mechanisms for cultural
internalization of traditional practices; and associated worldviews and cultural values. We dive
deeper into the role of informal social institutions in resource management, such as many taboo
systems. We find that taboos may contribute to the conservation of habitats, local subsistence
resources and ‘threatened’, ‘endemic’ and ‘keystone’ species, although some may run contrary to
conservation and notions of sustainability. It is asserted that under certain circumstances,
informal institutions may offer advantages relative to formal measures of conservation. These
benefits include non-costly, voluntary compliance features. Since management of ecosystems is
associated with uncertainty about their spatial and temporal dynamics and due to incomplete
knowledge about such dynamics, local management practices and associated institutions may
provide useful ‘rules of thumb’ for resource management with an ability to confer resilience and
tighten environmental feedbacks of resource exploitation to local levels.